documentation.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: "Documentation"
---

# First things first

Make sure the [prerequisites](prereqs.html) are in place.

These instructions assume you will be running the various CS Commons tools from a Unix shell (such as Terminal in Mac OS, Cygwin Terminal in Windows, etc.)

These instructions also assume some familiarity with [Git](http://git-scm.com).  The [Git Documentation](http://git-scm.com/documentation) page is a good place to start.  In addition, there are lots of other good online books and tutorials for learning about Git.

Finally: this page describes how to create and use CS Commons content.  The [Specfications](specifications.html) page documents the full technical requirements for CS Commons sites and artifacts.

# Installing the cs-commons script

CS Commons provides a Ruby script, called `cs-commons`, which automates the creation and maintenance of CS Commons artifacts and sites.

To install this script, run the following commands:

    cd $HOME/bin
    wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cs-commons/cs-commons-scripts/master/cs-commons
    chmod a+x cs-commons

These commands assume that your $HOME/bin directory is on your executable PATH.

Once the script is installed, you can get an overview of its commands by running

    cs-commons help

# Creating a site

First: create a public Git repository for your site.  We highly recommend using [GitHub](https://github.com): hosting your repository on GitHub will allow you to automatically publish your site using [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/).

<div class="callout">
<b>Important!</b> If you create your public repository using GitHub, make sure that the description of your repository contains the text <code>(cs commons)</code>.  Note that the parentheses should be included.  For example, a good description might be something like <blockquote><code>CS 101, Fall 2014 at Unseen University (cs commons)</code></blockquote>  Adding the text <code>(cs commons)</code> to the description tags the repository as being part of CS Commons, and enables your repository to be found in searches for CS Commons content.
</div>

Make a note of the Git URL of the repository you created.

In the example below, we'll assume that we've created a public Git repository called `cs101-fall2014` with the Git URL `git@github.com:pstibbons/cs101-fall2014`.

Run the commands:

<pre>
cd $HOME/git
cs-commons create-site <i>sitename</i>
</pre>

Replace *sitename* with the name of the repository you created.  For example:

    cd $HOME/git
    cs-commons create-site cs101-fall2014

The `create-site` command will prompt you to enter some information about the site you are creating, starting with the Git URL of your public Git repository.  Example run (user input in **bold**):

<pre>
Git repository URL: 
=> <b>git@github.com:pstibbons/cs101-fall2014</b>
You're using GitHub, excellent.  I can infer the website
and public repository URLs.
Public URL of Git repository (default: https://github.com/pstibbons/cs101-fall2014): 
=> 
URL where site will be hosted (default: http://pstibbons.github.io/cs101-fall2014): 
=> 
Title to display on index page
=> <b>CS 101, Fall 2014</b>
Copying js/cs-commons.js...done
Copying css/site.css...done
Copying &#95;layouts/default.html...done
Copying &#95;layouts/fragment.html...done
Creating &#95;config.yml...done
Creating index.md...done
Creating .gitignore...done
Creating cs-commons-site.json...done
</pre>

The public repository URL is the URL of a webpage containing an overview of your Git repository.  The website URL is the URL of the website where the site will be hosted.  If you are using GitHub, `cs-commons` will infer both of these automatically.

# Previewing your site

Once your site has been created, you can run Jekyll to preview it:

<pre>
cd $HOME/git/<i>sitename</i>
cs-commons preview
</pre>

replacing *sitename* with the name of the directory containing your site.

In your web browser, enter the URL `http://localhost:4000`.  You should see the home page of your site.  The `cs-commons preview` command runs Jekyll in server mode, and it will automatically regenerate your site as you edit files: just refresh the web browser to see your changes.

Type Control-C in the window where Jekyll is running to shut down Jekyll.

# Site checkin

The `cs-commons create-site` command only creates a local site that is not connected to a public Git repository.  To connect your local site to the public Git repository, run the following command from the local site directory:

    cs-commons checkin

The `cs-commons checkin` command will create a local Git repository, connect it to your public Git repository, and push the initial content of your local site to the public repository.  Example run (user input in **bold**):

<pre>
Finding files to check in...done
Creating empty git repository...done
Setting default branch to gh-pages...done
Adding files...done
Running git status to confirm files to be added:
# On branch gh-pages
#
# Initial commit
#
# Changes to be committed:
#   (use "git rm --cached <file>..." to unstage)
#
#	new file:   .gitignore
#	new file:   _config.yml
#	new file:   _layouts/default.html
#	new file:   _layouts/fragment.html
#	new file:   cs-commons-site.json
#	new file:   css/site.css
#	new file:   index.md
#	new file:   js/cs-commons.js
#
If you want to make adjustments to the files to be added,
I can run a shell for you.
Would you like to start a shell? (yes/no) 
=> <b>no</b>
Committing files...done
Setting origin...done
Pushing to origin...done
Checking repository description for (cs commons) tag...done
</pre>

At this point, if you are using GitHub, you should be able to do something very exciting: see your published site!  In your web browser, open the URL <code>http://<i>username</i>.github.io/<i>sitename</i></code>, where *username* is the GitHub user or organization which owns the public Git repository, and *sitename* is the repository name.  In the example above in the "Creating a site" section, the website URL would be `http://pstibbons.github.io/cs101-fall2014`.

Note that it might take a few minutes before the site appears.

# Adding content

A CS Commons site is just a Jekyll website.  Jekyll uses [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) as its markup language.  For example, your site will have a file `index.md` that is the Markdown source from which your site's start page is generated.  Try editing this file, then preview it using the `cs-commons preview` command.

You can (and should!) add other pages to your site.  You can add graphics.  You can modify the site's CSS styles to customize its appearance.

A good way to get a sense of how you can customize your own site is to look at the [Example Site](http://cs-commons.github.io/example-site).  It is hosted in a public GitHub repository: <https://github.com/cs-commons/example-site>.  You can use git clone to make a local copy:

    cd $HOME/git
    git clone https://github.com/cs-commons/example-site

# Publishing updated content

As you change the content of your site, use `git` to commit and push changes to your public Git repository.  If you are using GitHub, then your changes will automatically be published to your repository's GitHub Pages site.

The general procedure is

<pre>
git add <i>paths</i>
git commit
git push
</pre>

*paths* is a list of files and/or directories which have been updated.

When you run `git commit`, you will be prompted for a commit message.  You can configure which editor to use to edit commit messages as follows:

<pre>git config --global core.editor "<i>editor</i>"</pre>

For example, to use `nano`:

<pre>git config --global core.editor "nano"</pre>

<!-- vim:set wrap: ­-->
<!-- vim:set linebreak: -->
<!-- vim:set nolist: -->

Commit message:

need to document creating an artifact

documentation.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: "Documentation"
---

# First things first

Make sure the [prerequisites](prereqs.html) are in place.

These instructions assume you will be running the various CS Commons tools from a Unix shell (such as Terminal in Mac OS, Cygwin Terminal in Windows, etc.)

These instructions also assume some familiarity with [Git](http://git-scm.com).  The [Git Documentation](http://git-scm.com/documentation) page is a good place to start.  In addition, there are lots of other good online books and tutorials for learning about Git.

Finally: this page describes how to create and use CS Commons content.  The [Specfications](specifications.html) page documents the full technical requirements for CS Commons sites and artifacts.

# Installing the cs-commons script

CS Commons provides a Ruby script, called `cs-commons`, which automates the creation and maintenance of CS Commons artifacts and sites.

To install this script, run the following commands:

    cd $HOME/bin
    wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cs-commons/cs-commons-scripts/master/cs-commons
    chmod a+x cs-commons

These commands assume that your $HOME/bin directory is on your executable PATH.

Once the script is installed, you can get an overview of its commands by running

    cs-commons help

# Creating a site

First: create a public Git repository for your site.  We highly recommend using [GitHub](https://github.com): hosting your repository on GitHub will allow you to automatically publish your site using [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/).

<div class="callout">
<b>Important!</b> If you create your public repository using GitHub, make sure that the description of your repository contains the text <code>(cs commons)</code>.  Note that the parentheses should be included.  For example, a good description might be something like <blockquote><code>CS 101, Fall 2014 at Unseen University (cs commons)</code></blockquote>  Adding the text <code>(cs commons)</code> to the description tags the repository as being part of CS Commons, and enables your repository to be found in searches for CS Commons content.
</div>

Make a note of the Git URL of the repository you created.

In the example below, we'll assume that we've created a public Git repository called `cs101-fall2014` with the Git URL `git@github.com:pstibbons/cs101-fall2014`.

Run the commands:

<pre>
cd $HOME/git
cs-commons create-site <i>sitename</i>
</pre>

Replace *sitename* with the name of the repository you created.  For example:

    cd $HOME/git
    cs-commons create-site cs101-fall2014

The `create-site` command will prompt you to enter some information about the site you are creating, starting with the Git URL of your public Git repository.  Example run (user input in **bold**):

<pre>
Git repository URL: 
=> <b>git@github.com:pstibbons/cs101-fall2014</b>
You're using GitHub, excellent.  I can infer the website
and public repository URLs.
Public URL of Git repository (default: https://github.com/pstibbons/cs101-fall2014): 
=> 
URL where site will be hosted (default: http://pstibbons.github.io/cs101-fall2014): 
=> 
Title to display on index page
=> <b>CS 101, Fall 2014</b>
Copying js/cs-commons.js...done
Copying css/site.css...done
Copying &#95;layouts/default.html...done
Copying &#95;layouts/fragment.html...done
Creating &#95;config.yml...done
Creating index.md...done
Creating .gitignore...done
Creating cs-commons-site.json...done
</pre>

The public repository URL is the URL of a webpage containing an overview of your Git repository.  The website URL is the URL of the website where the site will be hosted.  If you are using GitHub, `cs-commons` will infer both of these automatically.

# Previewing your site

Once your site has been created, you can run Jekyll to preview it:

<pre>
cd $HOME/git/<i>sitename</i>
cs-commons preview
</pre>

replacing *sitename* with the name of the directory containing your site.

In your web browser, enter the URL `http://localhost:4000`.  You should see the home page of your site.  The `cs-commons preview` command runs Jekyll in server mode, and it will automatically regenerate your site as you edit files: just refresh the web browser to see your changes.

Type Control-C in the window where Jekyll is running to shut down Jekyll.

# Site checkin

The `cs-commons create-site` command only creates a local site that is not connected to a public Git repository.  To connect your local site to the public Git repository, run the following command from the local site directory:

    cs-commons checkin

The `cs-commons checkin` command will create a local Git repository, connect it to your public Git repository, and push the initial content of your local site to the public repository.  Example run (user input in **bold**):

<pre>
Finding files to check in...done
Creating empty git repository...done
Setting default branch to gh-pages...done
Adding files...done
Running git status to confirm files to be added:
# On branch gh-pages
#
# Initial commit
#
# Changes to be committed:
#   (use "git rm --cached <file>..." to unstage)
#
#	new file:   .gitignore
#	new file:   _config.yml
#	new file:   _layouts/default.html
#	new file:   _layouts/fragment.html
#	new file:   cs-commons-site.json
#	new file:   css/site.css
#	new file:   index.md
#	new file:   js/cs-commons.js
#
If you want to make adjustments to the files to be added,
I can run a shell for you.
Would you like to start a shell? (yes/no) 
=> <b>no</b>
Committing files...done
Setting origin...done
Pushing to origin...done
Checking repository description for (cs commons) tag...done
</pre>

At this point, if you are using GitHub, you should be able to do something very exciting: see your published site!  In your web browser, open the URL <code>http://<i>username</i>.github.io/<i>sitename</i></code>, where *username* is the GitHub user or organization which owns the public Git repository, and *sitename* is the repository name.  In the example above in the "Creating a site" section, the website URL would be `http://pstibbons.github.io/cs101-fall2014`.

Note that it might take a few minutes before the site appears.

# Adding content

A CS Commons site is just a Jekyll website.  Jekyll uses [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) as its markup language.  For example, your site will have a file `index.md` that is the Markdown source from which your site's start page is generated.  Try editing this file, then preview it using the `cs-commons preview` command.

You can (and should!) add other pages to your site.  You can add graphics.  You can modify the site's CSS styles to customize its appearance.

A good way to get a sense of how you can customize your own site is to look at the [Example Site](http://cs-commons.github.io/example-site).  It is hosted in a public GitHub repository: <https://github.com/cs-commons/example-site>.  You can use git clone to make a local copy:

    cd $HOME/git
    git clone https://github.com/cs-commons/example-site

# Publishing updated content

As you change the content of your site, use `git` to commit and push changes to your public Git repository.  If you are using GitHub, then your changes will automatically be published to your repository's GitHub Pages site.

The general procedure is

<pre>
git add <i>paths</i>
git commit
git push
</pre>

*paths* is a list of files and/or directories which have been updated.

When you run `git commit`, you will be prompted for a commit message.  You can configure which editor to use to edit commit messages as follows:

<pre>git config --global core.editor "<i>editor</i>"</pre>

For example, to use `nano`:

<pre>git config --global core.editor "nano"</pre>

# Creating an artifact

TODO: documentation on creating an artifact

<!-- vim:set wrap: ­-->
<!-- vim:set linebreak: -->
<!-- vim:set nolist: -->
